---
title: 📱 Trapped
tag: poetry
layout: post
---

Five times in five minutes--  
No new emails,  
No texts,  
No likes;  
Time to check again.  

We studied infinite loops  
In computer science;  
The basic logic is  
A condition  
That can never be fulfilled.  

And so the machine,  
So programmed,  
Performs the same operation  
Again and again,  
In search of that necessary and sufficient  
condition.  

But the machine cannot know--  
For it has no power of reflection--  
That its condition  
Will never be fulfilled;  
Always and forever false.  

Woe is man! We are worse than the machine.  
For though we know  
And can reflect,  
We are, and continue to be,  
Trapped in infinite loops  
By those ingenious machines.  

The unfeeling phone becomes our tyrant,  
Social media our means  
Of fulfilling some mysterious  
Necessary and sufficient condition;  
We must check, again.  

What is the condition which  
Traps us in this loop?  
For what do we long for?  
Why do we refresh, or scroll?  
Why must I pull out my phone again?  

And yet I do,  
Full knowing that no condition will be fulfilled;  
And so perpetuate the endless torment  
Of unfulfilled life;  
Trapped.  

Where is wisdom for this infant age  
Of information, and the technology  
To harness that information?  
Where is wisdom to be found?  
In email? On Insta? YouTube tutorial, maybe?  

Seek wisdom and be free  
From the tormentuous fantasy  
Of unfulfillable conditions;  
Unfulfillable, that is, by the little screens  
We have in our pockets.  

The condition is, perhaps, relationship;  
Relationship with God and man,  
With beast and earth,  
With truth and wisdom;  
No sparkling screens will ever fulfill  
This condition.  

And so you will remain trapped  
As so many do if you  
Keep reaching for your phone;  
Instead, be wise, and open your eyes;  
God loves you, and does fulfill.  