---
title: ⋂ Fundamental Logic
layout: post
tag: reflection
---

What is reason? One approach to answering this question is to consult the Scriptures, which describe reason's proximity to God:

> In the beginning was the λόγος, and the λόγος was with God, and the λόγος was God. (John 1:1)

Here, λόγος ("logos") can be translated as reasoning, word, or speech. This word λόγος is of course the root of our modern English word "logic," which generally means reasoning according to "strict rules of validity." That is, logic is concerned with what is provably true and provably false, and the discipline of logic is concerned with the means of determining truth and falsehood.

Another approach to answering What is reason? is to consider the way in which people reason. What does two people reasoning together normally look like? What goes on? What tools are used? What makes an argument reasonable as opposed to unreasonable? This second approach to our question points us back to the λόγος; that is, people tend to reason through speech, and reasonableness is generally taken to be one's appreciation for validity. That is, a reasonable person accepts a good argument. An unreasonable person, inversely, does *not* accept a good argument.

The question is then: what makes an argument good? One element of a good argument is the validity of connections between claims. This is again the arena of λόγος, or logic. The validity of connections between claims is, in fact, an exact science and governed by generally agreed-upon principles.

In this post, I explore the fundamental principles and notation of our modern discipline of logic. These principles and notations are a tool to discern true claims from false claims. These principles also form the root of modern science practices and computing. I first learned logic (propositional, first-order, and categorical) from [Hans Halverson](https://philosophy.princeton.edu/people/hans-halvorson) at Princeton University. This post is not meant to reproduce everything I learned in my introductory courses, but instead to distill key principles, notations, and insights from those courses, and to translate them to a broader readership.

## 🐴 Assumptions

The starting point of any argument is a set of assumptions. Assumptions are more than blind beliefs; assumptions are simply defined as the starting "truth" data of an argument. For example, suppose (assume) the weather forecast tells you that there's a 0% chance of rain, sunny conditions, and warm all day. Do you bring an umbrella with you? Probably not, because you *assume* the forecast is correct; that is, you take the weather forecast to be true data.

In the same way, when we "think through" something, or argue with someone, we come equipped with a set of claims we believe to be true irrespective of the argument itself. If, for example. I wanted to argue that Apple stock prices were going to fall in the next month, I would want to come equipped with a set of claims I believed were true: how sales are falling in x and y countries, how supply lines are clogged here or there, etc. These claims are my *assumptions*; that is, I argue from the position that this set of claims are true.

Note that this definition of assumption as the basic data of an argument means that an argument can be dead in the water if assumptions are false. Assumptions are those things that we believe (suppose, assume, etc.) to be true in order to make our case. And if our case rests on false assumptions, then the case is false to begin with.

An important lesson here is to be wary of your data. Even if you make a great argument from a set of data, the conclusion may still be false if the data itself is false. Good reasoning begins with good assumptions (or, in other words, with right beliefs).

## 💬 Symbology

The discipline of logic is concerned with connecting a set of assumptions together to prove or disprove some conclusion. To do this, logicians have devised a set of symbols to capture logical moves and logical relationships. These symbols and rules governing the symbols form an algebra that can be mapped to speech. Once an initial mapping is made between assumptions and symbols, work can be done according to the algebra. In other words, truth or falsehood of some conclusion can be determined.

### Letters as object placeholders

Letters serve the same use in logic as they do in basic algebra: to stand in the place of something. By 