---
title: ☕️ On Coffee
layout: post
category: reflection
---
When I talk about things I love and bring me joy, I go amiss without mentioning the source of many of my loves: my Dad. My love for coffee is one of those loves I inherited from him. As is the case for those loves I inherit from him, my familial love for him gives the coffee part of its flavor and aroma. And now that the coffee cup is in my hand, I add a bit of my own flavor to the Eastman brew. We keep our Oregon-West Virginia blend freshly roasted and ground. ☕️

Much of my data for the fact-based portions of this post comes from the International Agency for Research on Cancer's (IARC) "Drinking Coffee, Mate, and Very Hot Beverages" monograph (Volume 116). IARC monographs organize and review clinical and population-level research on the carcinogenicity of a wide-range of substances. I'm using the "Coffee, Mate, and Very Hot Beverages" monograph because its coffee section begins with phenomenal condensed historical, biological, and economical summaries of coffee.

## What is coffee, really?

> Because of the great variation in the types of coffee plants and seeds, botanists have failed to agree on a precise single system to classify them or even to designate some plants as true members of the *Coffea* genus (38).

Here's what they've come up with so far:

|Index|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Botanical Name|*Coffea arabica* L., *Coffea canephora*, etc.|
|Family|Rubiaceae|
|Subfamily|Ixoroideae|
|Tribe|Coffeeae|
|Genus|*Coffea*|
|Subgenus|Coffea|


The *Coffea* genus is diverse, with about 90 identified species. Of these 90 species, only 2 have become the coffee we sip in the morning: *Coffea arabica* and *Coffea canephora*.

<!-- TODO: Insrt image of coffee plant -->

Coffee plants are perennial, evergreen trees. *C. arabica* plants grow about 12'-18' tall, and *C. canephora* plants raise the roof around 24'-36'. "Leaves appear shiny, wavy, and dark green in colour" and have very obvious veins weaving their way through. But we know that the world is not really interested in the plant itself. The focus is the fruit, or "cherry" (38). Here's the insider's perspective:

<!-- TODO: Insert image of coffee cherry -->

## A Few of my Favorite Things

(^^ also my favorite song from *The Sound of Music*)

**Straight black, nothing added** is my coffee drink of choice. I do love other kinds of drinks, which I'll describe below, but black coffee is my daily companion. Of course, there are many ways to prepare even just regular black coffee. My favorite preparation method is **french press**, followed by **percolation** and **pour-over**.

<!-- TODO: insert image of French Press -->

**French press** makes the strongest and most syrupy coffee, in my opinion. I think this is because you never fully separate the grounds from the liquid coffee, so the liquid continually draws the coffee-ness from the grounds long after you've strained it. All other methods that I know of, besides some Bedouin and Turkish coffees, pass hot water *through* the grounds into a separate container, which means that the one shot through the grounds is all the coffee essence you're gonna get. French press coffee meanders with the grounds in an endless diffusive particulate dance. Thus, the coffee gets bolder, deeper, smoother, darker.

Downside to French press? The cleaning. Because it's all in one cylindrical container, you have to knock the grounds forcefully out of the bottom and then scrape and wash in that closed space until you get it clean. Small french presses can sometimes be a pain to fit a paper towel or hand down into to clean, and if you leave a french press sitting for a long time (as I'm prone to doing), the grounds compress, settle, and solidify in the bottom of the container. Those can be a rough time getting out. Moreover, if you can't knock or scrape the vast majority of the grounds out, you have to wash in a sink, which over time can clog the pipes. Not good.

Despite the cleaning hassle, french press coffee gets my #1 quality vote.

<!-- TODO: insert image of percolator -->
